The manager of the National Theater in
Westwood says that there indeed are at
least a dozen people who faint or become
ill during every showing.
>> Let's start by looking at a scene from a
movie that premiered in 1973.
>> I know the pacing is probably painfully
slow and maybe you're already mentally
twitching, wanting to pull out your
phone or switch to another video.
But this isn't a scene from a meditative
character drama. Instead, it's from the
biggest blockbuster spectacle of that
year.
>> My legs are just going and I want to go
in the lobby and not watch it and I have
to cover my ears.
>> There were reports of people screaming
and running out of the theater.
>> I fainted like 10 minutes after the
first beginning of the movie.
>> Becoming ill and vomiting, being carried
out of the theaters on stretchers. It
incited a genuine moral panic with some
religious groups believing the movie was
causing demonic possessions, but it was
also wildly popular.
>> Are you going to go back in and see more
of the movie now?
>> Probably. Yeah.
>> And scalpers reportedly would sell
tickets sometimes for hundreds of
dollars.
>> I don't know why I waited at 4 hours to
see that.
>> The Devil Mater did it. I bet
>> the number one box office movie of
>> a movie that so profoundly shook the
culture that Jason Zinnman writing for
Newsweek said The Exorcist opened in
theaters across the country and since
then all hell has broken loose. This
movie ran in the theaters for 2 years. A
lot of people credit The Exorcist for
playing a big role in starting up the
Satanic Panic, something that was still
going on 20 years later when I was born
in the '90s. But if you released this
movie now in 2025,
what would happen? It would probably do
well at the box office. Horror movies
are still a pretty good bet. And The
Exorcist is a well- constructed scary
horror movie. But I don't think it's
hard to argue that it wouldn't have
anywhere near the same cultural impact.
And this isn't just because culture has
become less religious. Jaws, which was
released just a few years later,
inspired a similar kind of cultural
panic. Not a religious one, but one that
has such a profound effect that to this
day some scientists call our collective
irrational fear of sharks. The Jaws
effect. Movies just don't have the same
kind of cultural impact that they used
to. Sure, people still might flock to
the theater for a Minecraft movie or
Barbenheimr, but they're being drawn in
by massive marketing budgets and stories
that draw from existing intellectual
property. I could be wrong, but while
Barbenheimer might have trended on
Twitter and Tik Tok for a week, it
doesn't seem like either movie will
inspire a shift in mindset on Barbies or
atomic bombs that will echo through the
culture for decades. At least not
anywhere near the scale we saw with
something like The Exorcist or Jaws now.
You might think, and maybe you thought
when you clicked on this video that what
I'll be saying is that movies just
aren't as good. But I think that's a
little bit of a copout. Sure, The
Exorcist and Jaws are incredibly
well-crafted films. Friedken and
Spielberg were basically at the top of
their game technically. They knew how to
wield all the forces of cinema that were
available to them at that time for
maximum effect. Sure, in some ways the
day-to-day fair at the box office might
not be at the same quality level as The
Exorcist or Jaws, but there are still
incredible movies being made today. And
I don't think the shift in average
quality is enough to really truly
explain the dramatic shift in cultural
impact that has happened over the last
50 years. If you released a movie like
The Exorcist today, it wouldn't have the
same impact. That means something else
has changed. We've changed. The culture
has changed. How we respond to the
movies has changed. And I'm not saying
going to the movies isn't fun anymore.
There are plenty of movies that provide
cool, entertaining, even sometimes all
inspiring experiences at the cinema. But
it doesn't quite feel the same. And even
in the last 5 or 6 years, I feel like
the experience of what going to the
movies is has changed for me. And I get
the feeling that it also has for a lot
of other people. To get to the bottom of
this, we're going to have to delve into
film history and we're going to have to
dig a little bit into some media theory.
But I hope you stick with me because
understanding why movies feel so
different now is just a window into
understanding why many parts of our
culture feel different now than they did
even just 10 years ago. You see,
suddenly, if you've noticed, the mood of
North America has changed very
drastically.
[Music]
This video is brought to you by Ground
News. Go to ground.news/toomasflight
to get 40% off.
Chicago, January 6, 1951. The Zenith
Radio Company begins testing an exciting
new technology. If you're one of 300
test households, for $1, you can order a
movie directly to your home television
set simply by sending a phone signal.
Seeing this, movie theaters and studios
already feeling pressure from antitrust
regulations and the rapid explosion of
home television feared phone vision
posed an existential threat. What will
happen? They speculate if movies can
skip the theater and go straight to
people's televisions at home. The
industry pushes back, even lobbying the
government to try to ban early
pay-per-view movies. And while the
technology didn't take off at the time,
their fears were not unfounded. TV would
not spell ultimate death for cinema. But
by the 1950s, theater attendance was
already in decline from its peak in the
30s and 40s.
[Music]
It's hard to overstate just how big a
deal movies were in the first half of
the century. Theaters were a
foundational American institution. In
1940, some reports indicate that over
60% of Americans were attending the
cinema weekly, 20% more than were
attending religious services each week.
The cinema was a community gathering
place. Small local neighborhood screens
would show one movie at a time. The news
reels that ran before films were often
the only opportunity citizens had to get
a glimpse of the Second World War as it
unfolded abroad. This was the era of the
Hollywood studio system with each of the
big studios cranking out over a 100
movies each year. But by the 50s, cinema
attendance was in freefall. The
Hollywood clergy and theater owners were
panicking. Could cinema compete with the
ease and convenience of the
entertainment now available in the
comfort of people's homes?
Some in the industry attempted to ease
their worries by recalling how Hollywood
had already overcome significant
threats. One exhibitor told Box Office
magazine, "It was new and improved
methods of presentation that had turned
the tide in cinema's costly,
discouraging, and prolonged fight
against radio entertainment.
TV shook the industry and with antitrust
regulations that made it so the studios
couldn't own their own theaters and
other post-war cultural changes
happening at the same time. By the
1970s, the number of theatrical
admissions had fallen over 70%. But the
movies wouldn't die so easily. To try to
win back audiences, theaters and the
studios made the movies bigger and more
exciting, implementing widescreen
cinemascope, 3D, and better sound.
Movies like Jaws, The Exorcist, and Star
Wars found people lining up around the
block. These new, bigger, bolder
cinematic experiences called
blockbusters gave cinema attendance new
life. And by the 80s, movie going had
stabilized. And with rising ticket
prices, box office income was hitting
all-time highs. But even though this new
world of multiplexes and blockbusters
still had significant cultural
influence, the movies and Hollywood had
changed forever, they would never again
represent the same thing to society that
they had in their golden era.
In January 2007, just 6 days after Steve
Jobs announced a technology that would
shape the coming decades, a company that
mailed DVDs to subscribers, announced
Watch Now, a service that would allow
consumers to instantly watch a movie on
their computer. These two technologies
together would set in motion a
transformation in how we consume media
over the next decade, eventually sending
the film and TV industry into the state
of crisis it currently faces. But as
Hollywood faces this new threat, I want
to tell the story of a force that has
already changed cinema irrevocably. This
is the story of how the movies have been
reshaped throughout their history. Not
by what plays within the four walls of
the theater, but by everything outside
those four walls, and how cinema must
respond if it wants to maintain its
cultural relevance.
The cinema is it a language about to get
lost and not about to die?
Um,
it's obvious that it's on the way out.
Since cinema was born, basically every
generation has been grappling with what
it perceives to be the death of the
medium. Basically, every technological
innovation has been perceived as a
threat by cinema. Some of these have
proven to be credible, but other
concerns like concern about color filmm
or home video have proven to be false
alarms with theatrical attendance
actually going up during those periods.
But in 2025, I think cinema does face
the most credible set of challenges it's
faced since the 1950s. Like they did
with TV, studios initially resisted
streaming before eventually scrambling
to join in. As streaming services like
Netflix have grown into full-scale
studios and studios began starting their
own streaming platforms, it began a
transformation in the economics of filmm
that we're still in the midst of now.
And when a global pandemic cratered the
box office to all-time lows, the shift
to streaming felt like a lifeline for
the studios. Theatrical windows have
shortened. Already down from the 2 years
we saw with The Exorcist in the '7s to
an average of 90 days. Now we're down to
just a few weeks or in some cases no
exclusivity at all. Consumers already
burdened by lingering pandemic fears and
economic pressure combined with rising
ticket prices increasingly opt to wait
for a streaming release. There are
reports claiming that Hollywood studio
backlots once the site of production for
a global cultural force have been
sitting dormant. And in 2023, industry
unions engaged in historic strikes to
fight for fair compensation in the midst
of these changes. And the movies
themselves have been changing as bigger
budget narrative TV entered a golden era
during the dawn of streaming. The
stories that made up many of the
mid-budget romcoms, adult comedies, and
dramas moved to television. This is how
in 1980 you have a movie like Cattyshack
for 6 million. In 1996, you have Happy
Gilmore for 10 million. And then in
2025, you don't see any mid-budget
sports comedies released in theaters.
But you do get a show like Stick from
Apple TV, who likely spent much more
than was spent on either of those movies
on the show. A show written and produced
by Jason Keller, who's worked almost
entirely in film before this, and
starring Owen Wilson, whose career also
used to be entirely in film before it
transitioned to television in just the
last 5 years. And Happy Gilmore 2 comes
out, but it goes straight to Netflix and
skips the theaters entirely. That's just
one small example of the many ways the
lines between TV and film have blurred.
The types of content you're
traditionally used to seeing in a movie
theater and the type of content we call
TV that exclusively streams at home in
multiple parts now often looks very
similar, is made by the same people
using the same equipment and with
similar budgets. Over the last 20 years,
while this transition has been
happening, for most Americans, the habit
of going to the theater fell out of
style. The American audiences stopped
going to the movies and then deciding
what to watch there. Instead, they began
going to the movies to see a specific
film. This change meant they needed to
be convinced to attend the theater by a
film's marketing. And facing more
difficult challenges in drawing people
to the theaters, the studio execs found
that movies driven by recognizable
intellectual property had built-in
audiences that were much easier to
market to. This is how remakes, reboots,
sequels came to dominate the box office
in the 2000s. By 2024, not a single one
of the top 15 box office hits was an
original film. This paid off in the
short run, like the turn towards
blockbuster filmm in the 1970s, the
shift towards large IPdriven franchises
like the Marvel Cinematic Universe and
the resuscitation of Star Wars has
driven record-breaking box office
receipts. referring to these hits as
tentpole films, distributors, studios,
even critics began to see IPdriven mega
hits as the only thing holding up the
industry, further pushing out smaller
mid-budget offerings. But this approach,
which has worked relatively well in the
2010s, is starting to see diminishing
returns in the 2020s. With almost no
development of new original worlds,
stories, ideas, IP, major blockbuster
films have become a kind of cultural
oraoris. Cinema no longer creates the
narratives that define the culture.
Instead, it relies almost exclusively on
its own past cultural influence or
existing worlds, characters, and stories
from other forms of media for its
success. All this while massive tech
giants throw billions into developing
technologies which threaten to undercut
an entire workforce of crafts people in
the industry. Many fear AI tech will be
too enticing for studios to pass up,
even if it's not what audiences want.
Like in the ' 50s and60s, cinema is now
poised at a decisive moment. And just
like cinema and its cultural influence
changed significantly from the 40s to
'7s, the movie industry that survives
this current shift and its cultural
influence might look radically different
on the other side. Those within the
industry and those paying attention to
this are already aware of pretty much
everything I'm talking about here.
There's been plenty of commentary going
on about what's happening and how cinema
might be able to weather this storm. But
this crisis I'm talking about isn't the
story I'm telling today. We're going to
look at something underneath all of this
that has already quietly transformed
what the movies mean. A shift not in the
movies themselves and how they're made,
but in the very way we perceive them. A
change that has already happened which
may be irrevocable but one which I think
we need to understand if we want cinema
to survive its current crisis and
maintain cultural relevancy.
They think that what they say is
communication. Communication is the
effect of what you say.
>> To understand the force I'm talking
about, we're going to have to go back to
the midentury.
>> The electric age is having a profound
effect on us.
We are in a period of fantastic change.
>> A time which like today was experiencing
a rapidly evolving media landscape.
Cinema, radio, television, the
telegraph, color print, photography, and
magazines had all sprung into existence
in a generation. While these media feel
commonplace to us today, for someone
living through that time, it was an
incredible shift in the culture. For
some, this time represented an
overwhelming but exciting new world. One
that was defined not by writing or the
printed word, but instead by prolific
auditory and visual media. Culture
rushed to adopt these new forms of
media, but it was also grappling with
the influence and power that they had.
>> For example, the advertising, the funny
page, the sports, the cross word
puzzles. I mean, so many people don't
even read the newspaper for the news.
They read it only for these things. And
these are new little quickie magazines
that you pick up that are a few inches
high and and in the radio you have the
five minute news spots and that what you
only get is is the most sensational
aspects of what's going on in the world.
In 1928, the League of Nations Child
Welfare Committee released a report
saying, "Some delegates expressed fears
that cinema performances happening in
the dark with promiscuity of sexes and
langorous music should excite the child
by appealing to his lowest instincts and
least noble passions and that bad habits
may result." This was a problem that
could easily be remedied, the committee
said, if the technology was developed
that would allow cinema to be shown in
broad daylight. But there were also more
serious concerns about the potential for
cinema to be used as a propaganda tool
by authoritarian governments.
Television, of course, did not escape
suspicion. There was concern about the
amount of violence shown in the westerns
and crime dramas that were incredibly
popular. But there was also concern
about the way television was changing
people's habits. A New York Times
article from 1949 titled, "What is
television doing to us?" reports that
whether the art of one person talking to
another is to be killed by television is
the subject of much energetic debate.
What would this do to society? Nearly
half of the television owners
acknowledge that their choice of an
evening to go out is influenced by what
programs are on, reported Jack Gold.
Political groups and social clubs are
feeling the rivalry of television. In
the burgeoning modernism of the 20th
century, whether it was cinema or
television, media itself was becoming
the infrastructure of ritual and
community for American culture.
Increasingly, people were gathering for
and around pieces of media rather than
civic or religious institutions. Hoping
to understand the implications of all
this, new figures arose. These new
cultural commentators and critics sought
to study and understand the messages
that these media conveyed and the
influence they had on society. In
Toronto, Canada, one of the people
trying to understand this media
landscape was a professor named Marshall
McLuhan. Advertising tells them how they
feel about what they have, not what they
should have.
>> McLuhan's work was sprawling,
controversial, and shrouded in riddles
and poetic language.
>> At the speed of light, there is no
sequence. Everything happens at the same
instant. That's acoustic. And uh
everything happens at once. There's no
continuity. There's no connection.
There's no there's no follow through.
It's just all now. But his core idea
that the mediums themselves were the
messages would spark a school of thought
that would provide a new way of seeing
how media influences culture.
>> The medium is not something neutral. It
it does something to people. It takes
hold of them. It roughs them up. It
massages them. It bumps them around.
>> The school of thought developed by
McLuhan and expanded by his followers
would come to be known as media ecology.
For the media ecologists, a individual
medium represented not just a way of
conveying individual ideas that we could
then judge or interpret. It was a
landscape that surrounded us. One which
could literally alter our behavior and
even the way we think.
>> When you put a new medium into a play in
a in a given population, all their
sensory life shifts a bit.
>> To understand this, think about how your
actual physical environment shapes your
behavior. If you live in an arid
mountainous landscape, this will cause
you to live a very different life than
you would if you lived in an urban
landscape. These landscapes don't just
affect our habits and lifestyle, but
also how we perceive the world. So,
think about how your physical
environment might shape the kinds of
sensory information you're attuned to as
a person. Someone used to living in a
city might easily tune out the sound of
an ambulance. While someone living in a
rural environment where they're more
exposed to the elements, might notice
specific shifts in air temperature and
wind direction that signal an
approaching storm. In the same way, the
media landscape around you, which is
made up of the different individual
mediums that you interact with, shapes
and influences your behavior. One of
McLuhloin's key ideas was that each
medium extended one of our senses. The
>> wheel is an extension of the foot. Book
is an extension of the eye. Clothing is
an extension of the skin. Electric
circuitry is an extension of the central
nervous system. While this extension of
our senses outward makes us more attuned
to certain kinds of information in the
environment, he theorized that it also
numbs us to other kinds of sensory
information.
>> The extension of any one sense displaces
the other senses and alters the way we
think.
>> McLuhan and others theorized that the
fundamental technology was language
itself. In the same way your
understanding of language and the words
in your language can shape how you think
about ideas, the other kinds of media
that you use to communicate and express
yourself also shape the way you behave,
see the world, and think. To understand
how subtle and nuanced the changes can
be that affect our perception of the
media we're experiencing, let's talk
about something called the Fordham
experiment. In the Fordam experiment,
they took the same video content and
showed it to audiences in two different
ways. For some audiences, the videos
were projected onto a screen. This means
the light is bouncing off a wall and
into your eyes. For another audience,
the videos were actually played on a
screen. This means illuminated pixels
were shining directly into the
audience's eyes. Each audience would
then write about what they watched. And
what the experiment discovered was that
even when they were viewing the exact
same content, there was a dramatic
difference in what each audience would
write about depending on how they had
viewed that piece of content. So for
example, for those that watched the
content projected onto the screen, only
about 6% mentioned losing a sense of
time. For the group that watched the
content from an illuminated screen, like
most of our screens are today, the
mentions of losing a sense of time rose
to 60%. And this happened with a lot of
factors like whether or not the audience
would comment on a specific scene or the
cinematic technique. So a relatively
subtle change in how the content is
presented can lead to a fairly
significant change in how the content is
perceived. Changing what elements of the
media we're more likely to notice or
focus on. Now that's one relatively
subtle shift in form. Think about what
happens when there's a larger shift in
mediums where many factors of how a
piece of information is conveyed change
at once. In in the 1860s, he would have
been unthinkable
because he he he can't talk,
but you put him on television and he's
dynamite. For a media ecologist like
Neil Postman, his primary critique of TV
was not the individual programs, but
instead the landscape that TV presented.
>> The voice over says more shooting in
Beirut today. We see some film of a
street perhaps in Beirut. Uh a body on
the floor. We hear shots. This image is
powerful. So people know of Beirut.
They know there's shooting in Beirut. Do
they know who's shooting at whom or why
or what is the historical context for
this?
>> One of his main concerns was the way
television was structured around
advertising. the function of television
in America
uh is to gather an audience which can be
sold to advertisers
>> which he theorized significantly
diminished its ability to present the
serious discussion of anything.
>> Uh American television knows that the
best way to gather an audience is to
provide something that is amusing. TV
according to Postman and McLuhan
converted everything even disasters and
wars into entertainment. Film editing
theory like the Kulashave effect which
shows that our perception of the meaning
of a shot can change depending on what
the filmmaker cuts to next can help us
understand his critique here. How is our
perception of the meaning of a serious
topic affected when it's juxtaposed
against and interrupted by an
advertisement for dish soap?
>> During an air show at Hill Air Base in
Utah, a Thunderbird arabatic jet
crashed, killing the pilot.
>> Hey, look who switched to Natural Light.
>> Through a traditional lens, we might
examine television media by looking at
the violence in a specific western. But
through a media ecology lens, we can see
that the bigger impact that television
had on our culture probably had more to
do with the way information was
presented on there. But when we adopt a
new media landscape, it also changes our
social and physical habits. The social
gatherings in public that cinema
provided gave way to more time spent in
intimate family gatherings around the TV
in the home. With the rise of TV, some
parents were concerned about their
children spending less time outside
while others saw this as a good thing
since it was keeping them off the
streets. When a large portion of society
changes how it spends its hours each
day, the implications of this on culture
are larger than the influence of whether
they're watching a violent western,
cartoons, or the evening news. But
perhaps the most important idea from
media ecology for what I want to
illustrate for you here is that from a
media ecology perspective, a medium and
what it represents and means to a
culture cannot be understood in
isolation. Because what a medium means
to us, the message it conveys, comes not
just from its inherent properties, but
from how it relates to the other mediums
around it. And when we begin to
understand this, we'll see clearly how
no matter where the industry goes from
here, cinema has already undergone a
significant transformation into
something new.
[Music]
To understand how the meaning of cinema
has evolved, we must first look at what
it represented in the past. If we return
to the midentury, even though cinema had
already fallen from its peak in the 30s,
it was still one of the most significant
cultural forces. This was a world where
if you wanted to know what was happening
or be entertained, you could turn on the
TV or turn on the radio if you're
fortunate enough to have one. But using
these devices, you would only be able to
see or hear whatever happens to be
broadcast on the few available channels
at that moment. If you're not interested
in what's being shown or said at that
time, you have no control beyond simply
turning it off or changing the channel.
And these technologies were still
largely built around communal spaces.
Families would gather in the living room
to watch TV or the radio might be on in
the kitchen. Your media consumption was
often linked to the consumption of those
around you. To access more information,
you'd need to physically retrieve a
newspaper or a magazine. The information
there would be dense and lowfidelity.
illustrations and photographs, written
reports of things happening in the world
delayed by a day or sometimes weeks or
months. For musical entertainment, you
could buy or listen to records, turn on
the radio, or go to a live performance.
Again, engaging with media experiences
that were both curated by others and
communal. And then in the midst of all
this, say you decide to go see a movie.
The movies in this environment share a
lot of features with the other media at
that time. You still have limited
control over what you consume and you
can only go see a movie at the specific
showtime. But the movies also stood
apart as an entirely unique media
experience. In this landscape, the movie
was arguably the pinnacle of sensory
entertainment. It was the biggest
cultural spectacle media could provide.
Its images were the biggest and the most
vibrant available.
Unlike books, newspapers or magazines
and even the low fidelity of early TV
where you had to focus your attention
and participate in consuming the media,
when watching a movie, you could sit
back in the dark and essentially allow
the film to wash over you. The movies
guided you through the story with an
almost hypnotic translike quality. You
were absorbed. They might sweep you away
to another world, transport you to
another time, and all of this alongside
a crowd of people. It's not hard to see
how the movies were one of the most
captivating and alluring media
experiences at that time. When cinema
arrived, it didn't just bring new kinds
of art and stories. It introduced
culture to a new kind of experience.
Today, the motion picture stands on a
plane of achievement few could have
foreseen half a century ago.
>> It was partly a commodification of the
theatrical experience, but it was also a
ritualistic, social, and almost
religious consumption of media. Unlike a
play, audiences from all around the
country or even the world could be
united around having seen the exact same
piece of media. But it also introduced a
new type of sensory experience. These
were large, exciting images that
commanded the audience's attention. A
movie star could be lit, captured, and
projected in a larger than-l life way
that would have been impossible in any
prior form. Taking into account the
media ecology view, we must ask, how did
these movies change our perception of
ourselves as humans? Unlike the print
dominant forms, cinema was a medium
where images, language, and music worked
together to create feelings. You could
analyze movies, but unlike text, they
didn't really require analytical
thinking to be understood. All of this
together meant that they were a uniquely
powerful cultural force. This distinct
and uniquely evocative experience that
cinema represented within the culture
explains why movies like Jaws or The
Exorcist could have so much impact and
influence. But what changed?
Well,
[Music]
but when I was a boy, we didn't have the
telegraph. Didn't have a telephone. of
course for their electric license or any
of these other things which have come up
to bother and help.
>> I remember when we didn't have
television and I was forced to be
creative all the time and to make up all
of my own games and to to play at acting
all myself and nothing was ever
presented to me so that I could simply
sit and absorb it.
>> The things that I'm seeing online
just going to scroll Instagram or
something to kind of get my mind off of
what's
>> maybe not Instagram.
>> Yeah, I agree. probably not Instagram.
>> Oh my god, what is this?
>> You wake up and immediately open your
phone. Whether you choose Instagram, Tik
Tok, Twitter, or Facebook, you're hit
with a torrent of shifting information
algorithmically tuned to be the most
interesting, attention-grabbing content
possible. One flashy image or video
after another. You can see videos of the
most exciting or horrifying events
happening around the world delivered
straight into the palm of your hand
before you even get out of bed. If you
set down your phone and turn to your
computer or TV, you have access to
almost every kind of recorded media from
any time period or part of the globe
available for you to choose from at any
time. You can watch an independently
produced YouTube channel. You can watch
the news in HD showing you violent or
catastrophic events. You can watch
children's programs. You can watch
videos constructed entirely by
artificial intelligence.
>> I tried asking for directions and got
sent to a floor that doesn't exist.
Almost anything you can imagine lies at
your fingertips, completely at your
control to pause, rewind, play again, or
share. A lot of attention is given to
how social media is shortening our
attention spans. But I think the story
is much more complicated. A full
analysis of smartphones, internet
streaming, and social media from a media
ecology perspective could be its own
hour-long video. So, I'm just going to
hit some of the highlights here. From a
media ecology perspective, people have
become acclimated to an environment of
rapidly shifting context. We expect an
increasing variety of content to be
constantly accessible and easily
switchable. Increasingly, very little
media consumption is communal or tied to
a specific time anymore. You might watch
a movie or some TV with friends or
family, but what you watch is now
usually disconnected from what most
other people around you are watching.
Even if you and a friend are watching
the same show, the chances that you both
watched the same episode the night
before is low. By allowing us to watch
whatever we want at any time, streaming
has reshaped collective viewing. For
internet content, personalization
algorithms only push this further. And
while the mediums that McLuhan and
Postman were examining were relatively
simple, with the introduction of the
computer, we enter an era that I would
describe as hyper mediums. These are
mediums that themselves contain smaller
mediums. So if you're watching this
video right now on your phone, the
content that I'm sending you is filtered
through the medium of the camera and
film making. There's certain biases and
effects that are inherent to video
content itself. But then that's also
being filtered through the medium of
YouTube, the algorithm, how it's
presented to you, the comments and other
meta design elements that surround the
video. Your perception of what I'm
saying is going to be impacted by how
positive or negative the comments are or
how many views the video has. And then
beyond that, it is additionally being
mediated by the form factor of the
smartphone itself. the fact that you can
carry the video around with you. You
might be watching this in bed or on the
toilet or on the subway. If you're
watching this video on your phone while
you try to cook dinner, it's going to
have a different psychological impact
than if you went into a classroom and
sat down and had to pay attention to one
thing for 20 minutes. For McLuhan, the
mediums of the past become the content
of the current mediums. And we're seeing
that happen right now. If the video of
cinema and television and the words and
photos of print are the content of our
social media feeds, what is the new
medium we're consuming? And what is the
message of that medium? Well, the medium
is the feed itself, the algorithm
itself, and our consumption of that.
Tech writer Alberto Romero posited that
when we're scrolling through short form
video, it's not the content itself that
delivers a dopamine hit, but the moment
we scroll, the millisecond where we're
anticipating what might come next,
whether it's something scary, funny,
interesting, or boring. It's the hit of
anticipation that we're consuming. Here,
Neil Postman's concerns about the
influence of advertising on a medium
rather than disappearing in the
transition from TV to social media only
become more amplified. Like television,
the goal of the feed and the algorithm
is to gather an audience and sustain
that audience's attention so that it can
show it more advertising. The result of
this is that it will show you not what's
best for you or the most important
information, but whatever is the most
attention grabbing. For mediums of the
past, like cinema, a book, or record, by
the time you consume the content, you
had already paid for it. Those making
the media were incentivized to make the
experience a good one so that it spread
word of mouth and more people bought it
and so that you might be more likely to
buy something from them in the future.
But there was no specific incentive to
hold your attention for as long as
possible. That all changed with
television with the move to an
advertising model where more time spent
watching by the viewer translated
directly into more money for those
creating the content and distributing
it. This is an environment where
subtlety, nuance, and quietude do exist,
but they're fairly niche products
delivered to a minority of viewers. The
vast majority of what filters to the top
of these algorithmically curated
platforms is the stuff that will grab
and hold your attention. And this
affects everything from Netflix and
Instagram to the video you're watching
right now. A significant aspect of the
smartphone is the way it fuses the
medium of the remote control with the
media itself. The medium of the
smartphone is a platform that we use to
bring stuff to us or to control what
we're seeing or the world around us.
There's nothing on our smartphone that
we're truly subjected to and don't
really have control over. Even the
sensation of grasping it in your hand is
kind of the ultimate sense of control
over the media you're consuming. I'm not
saying being able to control our media
is bad, and this might seem like a minor
difference, but I think it has a
significant psychological impact on how
we perceive the media as we consume it.
The act of craning our necks downward
for hours every day literally reshapes
our bodies and our experience of the
world. We doom scroll. We talk about
misinformation, internet bubbles, and
write think pieces about the attention
economy. Some people are quitting their
phones entirely or doing dopamine
detoxes, but this is already the water
we swim in. If McLuhan and the media
ecologists are right, the shift to
spending hours a day consuming media
through a new medium, our phone, changes
not just how we perceive the media on
our phone, but the entire world around
us. We have stepped into a new media
environment. And now we must understand
and respond to how it's reshaped our
habits, society, and perception. The big
takeaway is that in contrast to a lot of
the media of the past, the current media
landscape emphasizes control,
portability, individualization,
total participation in a global
landscape of media, and perception
mediated by desires through an
algorithm. Now, within this landscape,
think about the experience that going to
the movies represents. In the 1970s,
when you went to a movie, you were
stepping out of a world of relatively
lowfidelity visual media into an intense
multi-hour visual spectacle.
In 2025, when you go see a movie,
you're probably taking a break from the
most overwhelming sensory spectacle
humanity has ever created. When you go
to the movies now, you're committing to
a single piece of media for multiple
hours, which you must watch at a
predetermined time with a group of
people. a piece of media you have no
control over. The images on the screen
move at a much slower pace than what
you're used to seeing on your phone. And
if you aren't interested in it, you
can't immediately change it to something
else. The movies right now, they're one
of the only mediums that can actually
sort of force you to focus on and
immerse yourself in a single image for a
long period of time. You don't have the
option of escaping what the movie is
presenting to you unless you literally
physically move your body out of the
space it's being presented in. Even big
exciting action films can feel
deliberate and calculated in a world
where you can watch this
[Applause]
[Music]
or this
at any moment. So, cinema, the medium
that used to feel like the height of
spectacle, which could send culture into
a panic, now often feels like a
relatively slow, linear, and focused
journey through a single narrative. In
this landscape, it's the phones and the
content on the phones that are inciting
the kind of moral panic and cultural
change that The Exorcist did. The
printing press, electricity, the
telegraph, and television weren't just
tools of communication. They allowed
society to adopt new shapes, new ways of
living and interacting with one another.
The rapid adoption of smartphones,
social media, algorithmically tuned
recommendation feeds, and now AI is
currently reshaping the landscape of our
society, the same way it was reshaped in
the early 20th century by the mediums
that arrived then. And cinema's place
within this new landscape is different
than it was 50 years ago, just like it
was different in the 70s than it was in
the 1940s. Now, collectively, on
average, compared to all the other media
we consume, it represents something
else, a different kind of experience.
My goal with all of this is not to
construct a narrative that phones are
bad and movies are good. For McLuhan,
the media ecology approach wasn't about
trying to make moral assessments about
which mediums were better than others.
>> I seek to perceive, not to conceive
what's in front of me.
And perception is exploration.
>> Instead, he was more interested in
trying to just develop a clear
understanding of the media environment
we're actually living in. I do think
there are some notable downsides to the
hyperodern media landscape we all live
in now. And I think we should do
everything we can to document,
understand, and then overcome whatever
negative effects these new mediums might
have. But especially for those old
enough to have one foot in the media
environment of the past, it can be easy
to fall into a kind of understandable
nostalgia. But every time a new
environment forms with a new medium,
people go back and live in the old one.
>> Where we hold up the mediums of the past
as somehow more morally pure than the
mediums that are most popular today.
This has happened with things like the
novel, which was initially treated as
populist distraction. While today
there's almost a moral panic about the
fact that fewer people read literature.
And we're seeing this happen with
movies. When the big blockbusters of the
70s came out, a lot of filmmakers and
critics wrote them off as populist
escapism. But now they're treated as
something closer to a form of art. It
would be easy to romanticize film
somehow as a more pure or unblenmished
form of media. But that's not what I'm
trying to do here. The movies have
downsides. producing it is much less
accessible to the average person and so
channels of distribution have
traditionally been controlled by
corporate interests. Right now, for
example, No Other Land, an Oscar-winning
documentary about Palestine, is not
available for viewing in the United
States 6 months after winning because
nobody's been willing to distribute it
here. Cinema's power as a transporting,
emotional, and almost hypnotizing
storytelling medium is what makes it so
enticing, but it's also what makes it a
powerful tool for intentionally and
sometimes unintentionally perpetrating
harmful ideas and stereotypes
propagandistically.
Cinema propaganda wasn't just an issue
in Nazi Germany. It continues to be
produced in subtle and sometimes
insidious ways that audiences often
don't even realize. Another limiting
factor for cinema is how it has been
transformed from an affordable cultural
commodity into what is almost a luxury
experience. Back in the ' 40s, when over
60% of Americans were attending the
cinema, a movie ticket was only 25,
which would be about $4 today. These
days, for many Americans, a trip to the
movies can be cost prohibitive, pushing
it further towards being an activity
reserved for special occasions and the
upper class. So, as much as I have deep
concerns about the new hypermodern
technologies like phones, social media,
short form video, etc., this is not
about vilifying or blaming those things
in order to say cinema is somehow
inherently perfect or a great medium by
contrast. But neither is my goal to
proclaim that cinema is dead. This time
it's real. And now I've found the true
culprit. When Vim Venders made a
documentary asking the question, "Is
cinema about to be a dead language?"
Many of the filmmakers he interviewed
seemed to think it would be. I think
instead the opposite is true. The
language of cinema is far from dead.
Instead, it's been absorbed by the
mainstream culture as the primary
language of communication. A lot of the
media we now consume on our TVs and
phones uses cinematic language. These
mediums are essentially a form of post
cinema that adopt the visual grammar of
filmm. In this world dominated by visual
cinematic grammar instead of literary
grammar, valuing and studying the
cinematic roots of all this is only
becoming more important. So I'm saying
the movies have changed and on average
probably won't quite feel the same. But
that doesn't mean I think they've ceased
to be relevant. that they won't continue
in some way to provide interesting,
meaningful, culturally relevant
experiences and play a role in the media
landscape for a long time to come. But
if we want that to happen, if we want
movie going to continue to be an
accessible medium for people, we need to
give up false hope that cinema will
magically return to what it was in a
previous time and stop trying to force
it to compete with the new media
landscape by being something that it
isn't. Instead, the way forward for
cinema is to understand exactly what it
has to offer to us that social media,
phones, and television cannot.
So, let's talk about how cinema can
survive. It's very possible in the
future we'll go down a path where a
movie is just a different type of
content that plays on our TV or phone
like everything else. In this future,
theater screenings will be treated as
rare events or simply a marketing ploy.
We're already headed in this direction
to some extent, but I don't want this to
happen and I think it can be avoided.
So, let's look at how. First, like it
did in the 20th century, cinema could
once again become bigger. This is
already happening. The increasing
prevalence and promotion of IMAX
represents this century's version of
this division or cinemascope. And this
does work to some extent. better sound
along with bigger, more immersive
visuals can still provide some of the
grandest sensory experiences available
in media today. Some filmmakers like
Michael Bay even seem to be competing
with the intensity and rapidfire pacing
provided by internet video. But while I
love the trend towards impressive large
format film making with great sound
design and watching this scene from
centers on a big screen is one of the
best media experiences I've had this
year. I think trying to consistently out
compete internet media in terms of
creating the largest sensory spectacle
is ultimately a losing battle. Your
phone might be tiny in comparison, but
it provides pure uncut dopamineergic
entertainment and novel images in a way
that even the biggest cinematic images
these days will struggle to keep up
with. I'm not saying internet video is
better or that these bigger, more
cinematic movies are bad. I just don't
think cinema will win if it's trying to
be the entertainment spectacle of
culture when we're carrying around one
of the most intense media spectacles
ever created in our pockets every day.
Instead, where cinema can win is where
it continues to provide something that
your phone cannot. And this lies in its
ability to use that sensory experience
to immerse you in an emotional
narrative. The biggest advantage that
cinema has going for it is time and
focus. Cinema is one of the only forms
of storytelling remaining that asks you
to sit and give your full attention to a
complete story for an unbroken 2 to
three-hour chunk of time. Sure, you
might binge watch a TV show or doom
scroll for 3 hours, but those aren't
contained narrative experiences consumed
in a single sitting. Short form video
shifts your attention every few seconds
and TV breaks for episodes and ads and
happens exclusively at home in a
distraction laden environment. You can
listen to a podcast or audiobook for 3
hours, but again that 3 hours won't be
an entire complete narrative and you
likely won't be giving it your undivided
attention. You're probably listening to
it while you do something else. With a
movie, you're locked into a single
overwhelming experience for hours with
no breaks or division points. And while
obviously people are going to whip out
their phones even at the theater, the
key is that the intention of the form is
for you to be mentally immersed in a
complete story without distractions. And
even if not everyone consumes it this
way, this changes what it is. A lot of
TV is specifically made to be on in the
background. Netflix specifically
produces what it calls second screen
content with the expectation that
audiences are going to watch it while
they're on their phones. So, this means
that even if you sat down and completely
immersed yourself in one of these
Netflix shows that is made to be on in
the background, you aren't going to get
the same experience as if you immersed
yourself in something that was made to
be immersed in. This means that even if
you aren't on your phone while you're
watching a show made to be on in the
background, you're still watching
something that has been made for the
level of attention of someone who is.
Movies, meanwhile, are usually made for
the theatrical experience where an
audience is going to give it their
undivided attention. When people hear
filmmakers say this is made for the big
screen, I think it's sometimes perceived
as elitist or nostalgic posturing. But
having the theatrical experience as the
end goal for filmmakers as they create
the movie really shapes the kinds of
movies that filmmakers will make and how
they make them. When a movie is made for
an environment where you're supposed to
give it your full attention, the effects
of that will impact the viewing
experience, even if you end up watching
that movie at home. Cinema's unique
demands on our attention and time in
this media landscape means that movies
are asking a lot more of an audience in
terms of time and attention commitment
relative to other media today. But this
is exactly what makes them a
particularly powerful form of media in
the landscape. Given this commitment of
time and attention, filmmakers have a
unique opportunity to sweep up and
transport audiences in an emotional,
evocative experience that other kinds of
media might not be able to. Movies that
really want to succeed today need to
understand the bargain they're striking
with audiences and at least attempt to
deliver something worthwhile in return
for what they're asking. But within this
space, movies also now have an
opportunity to be something much more
inherently meditative and contemplative.
I don't mean that all movies need to be
slow artouse fair, although I think
that's great and more people should give
it a shot. I mean even a basic drama can
create space to think about a single
subject, character, idea, world, or
feeling for hours in a way that
audiences probably aren't doing with
other media they're consuming. I think
the movies that will stay relevant will
be the ones that use this time in a way
that rewards the audience for doing so
instead of just providing cheap
entertainment escapes. It's not that
cheap entertainment escapes are bad or
that movies should never try to do that,
but those are now freely available in
your pocket whenever you want, and
paying $20 to go sit in a room for a
cheap entertainment escape won't feel as
worthwhile when you can get one for free
at home.
We also need to recognize and lean into
the communal value of movie theaters and
the movies themselves. These days, I
often hear people complain about the
theatrical experience. People are on
their phones or there's distractions,
but there can really be a magic to
watching a film with a group of people,
and the movies need to try to retain
that. Even when everyone is quiet, you
can feel something. The experience
changes when you're with people. And in
the same way movies being made for
theaters impacts the demands they place
on our attention, movies being made for
theaters also means they're made to be
watched with a group of people. I love
watching movies alone, but most of my
best movie memories involve a theatrical
or group experience. Even at home, the
movie night creates a unique social
opportunity for a group to experience a
complete narrative together in a way
that pretty much no other media
currently provides. Sure, you can watch
TV together, but it's hard to do that
with a group of people who are all
living different lives. You have to
coordinate together to watch the same
show and all be on the same episode at
the same time. Consuming a movie with a
group provides a unique opportunity to
all experience a single narrative
together and then discuss it afterwards.
In our increasingly socially fragmented
and individualistic society where our
media consumption is more and more
specialized and presented on tiny
screens just for us to see, there's a
value in getting to experience something
more communal. And movie theaters with
their progression towards premium
experiences and larger multiplexes have
kind of been leaning away from the value
of the communal experience rather than
into it. Theaters are often trying to
compete with streaming by trying to make
the theater as comfortable as your
living room. But while I love a heated
lounger as much as anyone, I think this
might not be the most productive
approach. Many of the best theatrical
experiences I've had come from smaller,
less comfortable indie theaters in my
town where even obscure movies would
sell out and there was a sense of
community surrounding each screening.
Theaters can lean into this more by
making memberships more affordable and
accessible and by providing lounge and
gathering areas outside the screens
instead of literally designing the
spaces to minimize human contact and
interaction, shuttling you like cattle
in and out of the screen. I'm not
insinuating these are the only things
that make the movies valuable these days
or that this is an easy or surefire way
to save cinema, but I think if the
movies want to continue to carve out a
valuable, vibrant, successful place in
the media landscape of today, they need
to capitalize on what makes them unique.
instead of trying to morph into what
everything else is in order to compete
with that or doing mostly what's been
happening, sticking its head in the
stand, pretending the problem will go
away while the box office slowly
continues to shrink. This narrative I've
been crafting focuses mainly on
Hollywood American movie going and the
blockbusters that draw the largest
crowd. And while similar dynamics are
playing out around the world, each
country has its own unique set of
cultural, economic, and political
dynamics that affect how well the
theatrical experience thrives. And the
world of indie and international film,
along with many independent boutique
theaters, are already leaning into much
of what I'm describing here and how they
make movies and present them. If the
studios want to stay relevant, Hollywood
will have to catch on. Otherwise,
they're faded to continue down the path
they're already on towards simply
becoming content production engines for
their own streaming platforms, which
will compete with all the other content
on the internet. The movies should be
interesting, thoughtful, and worth your
time. They should continue to be
immersive, visual, sonic, sensory
experiences. They should continue to be
communal experiences, an event that we
go to or consume with a group at home
rather than just another piece of
content to be consumed the same way we
consume anything else. Not because of
some kind of elitism where cinema is
superior, but because it offers us a
unique media and cultural experience
that other forms of media don't. Cinema
will never again have the kind of
cultural dominance it had in the ' 40s,
and it's unlikely it will even return to
the influence it had in the 70s. To
imagine it would would be wishful
nostalgia. But as the industry faces the
biggest shakeup it's seen in 80 years, I
believe it can continue to be a valuable
and relevant cultural experience for a
long time to come. As long as we value
it for what is actually unique about its
ability to transport us together.
When you sell them happiness, when you
sell them narcotics, when you sell them
fictionalized news, uh to sustain their
security, they accept it and they begin
to accept that is true.
>> One of the most important things we can
apply a media ecology lens to is the
news. We need to understand that it's
not just the content or information
conveyed by the news, but the way news
is conveyed that shapes our
understanding of the world. And one of
the best tools that I know of for
understanding the modern news landscape
is my sponsor for this video, Ground
News. Ground News doesn't just show you
the news, it gives you the tools you
need to truly understand the news. Each
story is surrounded by a bunch of meta
context. It tells you the political bias
of each outlet reporting the story and
even lets you quickly compare and browse
through different headlines. So, you can
see the way a story is represented in a
headline shapes our understanding of the
events being reported. Take a look at
this recent story about Steven Coar's
show being cancelled. A quick survey of
the headlines shows us the contrast in
how different media outlets represent
this story, which can give something a
positive or negative spin. One of my
favorite features is the blind spots
feed, which shows you stories that are
being under reportported by both the
left and the right. Ground News is a
great way to not just consume the news,
but I think understand the narratives
that are being conveyed through the news
every day. You can check out Ground News
for free, but you can get access to the
blind spot feed and all the other
premium features when you sign up for a
Vantage subscription, which you can get
for 40% off when you use my code at
ground.news/toomasflight.
Click the link in the description below
or go to ground.news/toomasflight
news/toomasflight
to get that 40% off your Vantage
subscription today. I offer ground news
some of the attention you've given me so
that I can afford to keep making these
videos. When you become a patron, you
can get access to the film club where I
choose movies for us to discuss along
with movie reviews. You can sign up at
patreon.com/thomasflight.